# 2.18 Snake diagram

## Introduction

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">We have independently developed a JavaScript plugin, inspired by the snake diagram in <a target="_blank" href="https://gpcrdb.org/">GPCRdb</a>, to create snake diagrams for each functional olfactory receptor in the CORD database. Typically, the x-axis represents the sequence positions of residues, while the y-axis represents interaction levels or specific properties, such as conservation or ligand-induced conformational changes. Snake diagrams are highly valuable for researchers studying olfactory receptors as they provide insights into receptor structural features, ligand-binding sites, and the impact of mutations or ligands on specific residues. These visualizations are particularly useful for visualizing the three-dimensional structure of olfactory receptors in a two-dimensional representation, aiding in the identification of critical regions involved in ligand binding and signal transduction.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">The snake diagram comprises two fundamental elements: circular symbols representing residues and curves connecting these circles. The arrangement sequence of the snake diagram starts from the upper-left corner with the initial circular symbol, following the direction of the curves and extending all the way to the lower-right corner. Each section within the snake diagram sequentially corresponds to N-terminal, TM1 (Transmembrane helix 1), ICL1 (Intracellular loop 1), TM2, ECL1 (Extracellular loop 1), TM3, ICL2, TM4, ECL2, TM5, ICL3, TM6, ECL3, TM7, H8 (Helix 8), and C-terminal regions.</p>

## Reference

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">Horn F, Bettler E, Oliveira L, Campagne F, Cohen FE, Vriend G. GPCRDB information system for G protein-coupled receptors. <i>Nucleic Acids Res</i>. 2003 Jan 1;31(1):294-7.</p>