# 2.4 Gene annotation

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">The DNA and protein sequences of olfactory receptor genes are the most fundamental and core data in CORD. This data is annotated using the Genome2OR tool from the genomes of 2,781 chordates. In this section, we will outline the process of annotating olfactory receptor genes.</p>

## Initial gene annotation

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">We downloaded assembly data for 6,602 genomes from 2,781 chordates from the NCBI Assembly Database. These genome assemblies were used as input for Genome2OR annotation. Since species from different orders use different hidden Markov model files, genomes from the same order were annotated together. Here, we use the annotation process for actinopteri as an example.</p>

```bash
# Define genome assembly file paths
GDIR="${GENOMEDIR}/Actinopteri"
mkdir $GDIR
cd $GDIR

# Define profile HMM name
PFILE="Actinopteri"
# Define output file paths
OUTPUTDIR="./annotation"
# Create a working directory
mkdir Actinopteri
# Enter the working directory
cd ${WORKDIR_STEP1}/Actinopteri

# Execute the annotation program
for genome in `ls $GDIR`; do
    prefix=${genome%.*}
    gopath=${GDIR}/${genome}
    Iteration $PFILE $OUTPUTDIR $gopath -p $prefix -i 3 -e 1e-10 -c -1 -v
done
```

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">The "Iteration" program here is a subtool within the Genome2OR toolkit, designed for iteratively annotating olfactory receptor genes in genomes. </p>

* The "-p" parameter defines the prefix for output files; 
* the "-i" parameter specifies the number of iterations for annotation; 
* the "-e" parameter defines the E-value threshold; 
* the "-c" parameter specifies the number of CPU cores used for annotation, where -1 indicates the use of all available CPU cores.

## Data deduplication

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">During the annotation process, the Genome2OR tool internally utilizes the CD-HIT tool to perform preliminary deduplication of the annotated results. Here, we employ more stringent parameters to further deduplicate the sequence data, ensuring data quality.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">We utilized olfactory receptor data from 10 model animals, including humans, mice, and zebrafish, with high-quality annotation results, as test data. Ultimately, we selected a 99.5% parameter for deduplication. For pseudogenes and low-quality DNA sequences, we employed a 99% parameter for compression and imposed restrictions on sequence length.</p>

## Reference

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">Han W, Wu Y, Zeng L, Zhao S. Building the Chordata Olfactory Receptor Database using more than 400,000 receptors annotated by Genome2OR. <i>Sci China Life Sci.</i> 2022;65(12):2539-2551.</p>

<p style="text-align:justify; line-height: 1.8; ">Li W, Godzik A. Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large sets of protein or nucleotide sequences. <i>Bioinformatics</i>. 2006;22(13):1658-1659.</p>



